We first looked at how we can motivate
people who are just looking and try and
knock them into those impulse purchases.
We then looked at how we could remove
some of the impact of high shipping
costs by offering memberships or trigger
points where people could increase their
basket value in order to get free
shipping. Then we took an intensely
critical look at the frankly
unacceptable practice of requiring
people to sign up for an account before
they go to checkout. We then looked at
how to boost
You see them come onto your website and
your heart rate starts to raise a little
bit. You see them find their way to a
product category page. They're close.
They find a product that they like. They
click on the product page and you can
see them browsing, looking at the
information. Result. They've clicked add
to cart. Here we go. You feel your pulse
start to raise a little bit more. No
matter how many sales you get, the
thrill of watching a live purchase never
dies. They go through to the checkout,
but then nothing. They leave. They close
their browser window, never to return.
Hurt, you start scheming. Can you find
them? What was their IP address again?
Where are they based? Wait, could I
visit them? They're only a couple
hundred miles away. Maybe they'll be
back. But what if they're not?
Let's look them up on Facebook.
Basket, cart, or checkout abandonment is
painful, and it doesn't get any easier
as the numbers start to scale. If you've
ever watched visitors using your
e-commerce store live in your analytics,
it can be a torturous thing. Checkout,
basket, or cart abandonment never gets
any easier. As the numbers scale, you
just get more frustrated at these
horrific leeches on society daring to
click on your products and add them to
their baskets but not finish the
purchase. But in this video, we're going
to address the top causes of basket and
checkout abandonment and how to fix
them.
Firstly, some terminology stuff because
the phrases cart abandonment and
checkout abandonment are thrown around
kind of interchangeably. They actually
do mean different things. And by the
way, for those who aren't in the UK,
basket or basket if you're up north
means cart. So cart abandonment and
basket abandonment, they mean exactly
the same thing. Right? If it's not
already complicated enough, when you go
onto an e-commerce store and you put a
product in your basket or your cart, but
you then don't check out, that is called
cart abandonment. You've got your cart,
but you've abandoned it. You haven't
gone to the next stage. If you open that
basket or cart, then click check out,
and you go into the checkout process,
but you don't finish it, that is
checkout abandonment. Now, what we're
going to be looking at today are ways of
mitigating both of these things. One of
the most useful places that you can go
to get insights on this stuff is Google
Analytics. And if you go to conversions,
e-commerce, shopping behavior, you
should see a chart that looks something
like this. What this shows you is the
different stages of your e-commerce
funnel. For example, in this case, we
can see there have been 66,000 sessions
in this time period with 21,000 of those
sessions having product views, i.e. the
person visited a product page. 3 and a
half thousand of those sessions had an
add to basket in. 2,800 of those
sessions had someone begin the checkout
process. And 1,133
of them resulted in sales. And what we
can see is the percentage drop off at
each stage. Now the question that you
might have right now is is my data
normal? My data looks different to this.
And it's a very common question that
store owners have. What is an acceptable
checkout abandonment rate? Well, what I
wanted to do is show you three different
examples from three different businesses
to show you how and why this can vary.
So in this first example we can see that
we have a basket abandonment rate of
38%.
So on average 38% of the people the
sessions that have add to baskets don't
result in a checkout. Now in this
example we can see a basket abandonment
rate of 44% and in this example a basket
abandonment rate of 51%.
Now, we might look at this and think,
"Oh, no, 51%. That is horrific." But
this particular business is a B2B
company and their customers put items in
their basket to use as a quote
generator. They then get in contact with
the business to talk through the quote
and see if they can negotiate a bulk
discount. So, that is absolutely fine.
Another major difference that you might
see with your car is the number of
sessions that result in product views.
For example, in this one, we've got 19%
of sessions resulting in product views.
Whereas in this one, we can see a
whopping 43%
of sessions resulting in product views.
So, if you've got the 19%, you might be
thinking, "Oh no, my website visitors
aren't even viewing my products." Well,
in this case, that's because they've got
loads of really good ranking quality
information on the types of products
that they sell. they're picking up a lot
offormational searches that are coming
to the website. So, they're not just
getting commercial traffic. Whereas on
this site, the majority of the phrases
that they're ranking for are purely
commercial. They don't have as much
informationational content on their
website. So, that is why a higher
proportion of their sessions are
resulting in product views. So, what I'm
saying with this is there are loads of
variables that will impact what your
cart abandonment, what your checkout
abandonment rate looks like, including
the quality and the intent of your
traffic, the percentage of returning
visitors, so you know exactly what
they're getting versus new visitors is
how much consideration goes into the
purchase of your product. For example,
if you're selling prom dresses, you're
going to be getting a lot of people that
are just adding to basket to save it for
later as they're browsing around the
internet. Whereas, if you're selling SD
cards, you're going to get a lot of
people that know exactly what they need
and they just need to buy it. So, that's
going to result in different checkout
and cart abandonment rates. Now, I
really wanted to give you an average
across all of e-commerce. So, I've got
some stats for you. You want some stats?
I've got stats for you. According to
Fresh Relevance, the average cart
abandonment rate is 57.6%.
But wait, Sales Cycle says it's 84.27%.
Pretty big difference between 84% and
57%, right? Yes, exactly. What looks
good for you might be horrific for
another business. The most useful
approach is to take a look at analytics,
benchmark each of these levels, and then
work on improving the percentage of
people that move from one level to
another. Benchmark against yourself, and
continually focus on improvement. All
righty, onto the tips. by some remote
chance you happen to be enjoying this
video, then please click the like button
and also subscribe to our channel. We
release a new video every week and we
also do a YouTube live session where
we'll typically be ripping apart some
websites and showing you how you can
improve your website's performance. So,
click the subscribe button and the
little bell icon to be notified every
time we post something new. Oh, and uh
thing number two. If you want some free
help with your digital marketing, the
team here at Exposure Ninja offer what's
called a free website and digital
marketing review. We'll ask you a few
questions in a quick form about your
business, your digital marketing, and
your goals. We'll then research what
you're doing, how well your website's
performing, and what you could be doing
better. And we'll put our
recommendations into a 15minute video of
the things to focus on in order to drive
more leads and sales through your
website. This service is completely
free. You get the video sent to your
email for free by one of our team. All
you need to do to request it is go to
exposurinja.com/re
and fill in the form. So that's
exposuringinjinja.com/re
and fill in the short form. And for the
YouTube commenter who said they loved my
accent, do enjoy the rest of the video.
Now the first question to ask if we're
going to solve cart and checkout
abandonment, the first question we need
to ask is why do people abandon? Well,
luckily the Bayard Institute has
collected some data for us. They
conducted a study of US adults where
they asked, "If you've abandoned a car
in the last 3 months, what were the
reasons that you abandoned it for?" And
what they got was not massively
surprising to be honest. By far the
biggest reason that people abandoned
carts is that they were just browsing.
They had no intent of purchasing. They
were just throwing items into their
cart. No surprises here. Now, whilst
we're not going to be able to avoid this
completely, what we can do is nudge some
of these people into impulse purchases.
We'll come back to that later on. Of all
the people that had intent, i.e. they
weren't just browsing, the most common
reason that people abandoned car was
that extra costs were too high. For
example, things like shipping, taxes,
and fees. But let's solve that one in a
minute as well. The next most common
reason was that the website wanted them
to create an account. Nothing more
annoying than trying to purchase and all
of a sudden you're thrown up with some
register thing. You're like, I don't
want to register. I just want to check
out. Now, what's really important here
is we actually do want people to
register for an account. We want people
to be members of our ecom store so that
we can market to them continually. This
isn't about not forcing people to sign
up or not encouraging them to sign up.
This is purely about when you ask for
that. We're going to look at a really
elegant implementation of this strategy
just a bit later on. The next reason,
too long or complicated checkout
process. The next was that people didn't
trust the site with their card
information. We're going to look at how
to build credibility. Then I couldn't
see or calculate the total order cost up
front. The website had errors or
crashed. Ouch. Returns policy wasn't
satisfactory.
There weren't enough payment methods or
the credit card was declined. Now, I'm
going to lump in these last two
together, and we're going to solve that
one as well. So you can see that here
we've got a bunch of things regarding
website functionality, but also business
decisions, things like delivery times.
This is about the relationship you have
and the package that you have with your
couer. So that's beyond the scope of
this video. Today we're going to be
looking at the conversion elements and
how what we do on your website to remove
some of these objections. Okay. So the
I'm just browsing people. How do we get
them to purchase? Well, what we can
really do is nudge them from I'm just
browsing into an impulse purchase.
That's all we can really do. We have to
allow people to just browse. And we're
fine with people adding their stuff to a
cart. Now, we can help them with this by
making their cart autosave so that when
they come back to our site, they've
still got their cart there. Better still
is that you allow people to save their
cart. and you can get Shopify plugins
that will allow you to do this where
they can enter their email address to
save it for later. This means that you
can run cart abandonment emails to them.
It also means that if they check into
your cart from another browser, you can
allow them to sign in and see the stuff
that they've got there. But let's return
to this idea of bumping them into an
impulse purchase cuz everyone loves a
good impulse purchase, right? Well, here
I am on the Boots website. I'm just
going to add a product to my basket and
then I'm going to click view basket and
check out. Now, I might be here on
impulse perhaps, but what I'm seeing now
is I'm seeing a little nudge to get me
to purchase because I've got a couple of
free gifts already in my cart. So, this
is a great way of nudging people into an
impulse purchase. There's other stuff
going on on this page, which we're going
to come back to in just a minute.
Anything that you can do to push people
into that impulse purchase from just
looking mode is a good thing in
e-commerce conversion will make your
Google Analytics e-commerce conversion
rate very happy. Okay. Next, those
unexpected costs. We've all been through
it. You go through the process, you find
the right products that you want, you
stick them in your cart, you go to
checkout, you see a horrific delivery
cost, and you're immediately put off. Of
course, the ultimate answer is to not
have horrific delivery costs. Although
weirdly there are some occasions where
you might want to have high delivery
costs. We'll come back to that in a
minute just as well. But the overall
thing is you don't want to have big
delivery costs. Now there's of course an
argument to say if you do have high
delivery cost because what you're
delivering costs a lot of money to
deliver. Where do you present that? Do
you present that upfront on your
website, for example, in a benefits bar,
knowing that some people are just going
to bounce immediately as soon as they
see that delivery cost, or do you wait
till they've gone through the process of
adding items to their cart to show them
the delivery cost at the end? Well, Neil
Patel says you want to bounce them
straight away. I completely disagree
with that. I think you want them to have
gone through the process of adding stuff
into their cart. They've put in that
time and energy to find the right
products. they have a sunk cost already,
then you hit them with a delivery cost
if they're unattractive. Now, of course,
obviously, you don't want them to bounce
at all if they see your delivery cost,
but if you're going to have a certain
number of people bounce, it's better to
have that as a high cart abandonment
rather than a high bounce rate in the
first place. Now, one thing you can do
is advertise the trigger points at which
people get free delivery. You can see
here on this B2B e-commerce site, free
next day delivery, orders £100 and over.
Great. So, whatever the delivery costs
are, I know that I will get free
delivery over a certain amount. And it's
at this point where a high delivery cost
potentially becomes an incentive. Let me
explain. Let's say that I've spent £90
on this site and I know that if I spend
over £100, I get free next day delivery.
Now, it's at this point where actually,
weirdly, a high delivery cost can
actually incentivize a higher order
value. Stick with me. Let's say that I'm
on this site and I've spent £70. I go to
the checkout and I see that my delivery
costs are £15. £15? Ouch. I also see
that I get free delivery over £100.
Well, I can spend another £30 on product
to get free delivery. Basically, another
£15 to get £30 worth of product. My
additional purchase is half price. Happy
days. I'm now incentivized to increase
my average order value because that
delivery cost was high. If that delivery
cost wasn't as high, let's say it was
only two or three pounds, I wouldn't
have been as incentivized to get over
that free delivery threshold. So, you
can see how a high delivery cost in some
circumstances can actually increase your
average order value.
You thought digital marketing was
simple. It's not simple, but it's
definitely fun. Now, going back to the
boots example, you can see that they
show us how close we are to that free
delivery threshold. I then have products
here related to what I've got which can
I can use to nudge me over that free
delivery threshold. Smart move. Now,
this isn't massively easy to implement
and according to the platform that
you're on and the extensions you've got,
you may or may not be able to do this,
but it's a good thing to do. This is
ideal because it removes the thinking
part out of your customers checkout
process. And anytime we can remove the
thinking part out of anything, we know
we're going to get some results. Now,
here's a weird example to watch out for.
Here I am on boohhoo.com and I'm being
asked to put in my shipping information
before I can see any price, before I
even see the delivery cost. On mobile,
that's okay because when I get down and
see that my delivery cost is a whopping
£5.99 on the £5 dress that I've ordered
on this example, you can't see, but the
product I'm buying is this halterneck
puff sleeve smok. You know, I just
thought I'd mix it up a bit for the
Exposure Ninja videos. Anyway, it's a
five pound product and they want to
charge me 5.99 for next day delivery,
which by the way isn't the cheapest
delivery option they have. They just
want to charge me for next day for some
reason. Now, this would be a real
turnoff to me, but I can see that for a
whole year, for an extra £2, I can get
free next day delivery unlimited. Happy
days. That sounds good to me. The
problem is on desktop I don't get that
same logical process. I go straight to
the shipping page and I can see
immediately this delivery cost which
looks really high. I've got no knowledge
at this point that I can reduce that. I
don't know that I can change for
different options and I don't know that
the premier option is available. So, I
would imagine that the basket
abandonment rate on desktop will be
significantly higher because people are
being hit with this high delivery cost
immediately without any context or
information about how to lower it.
Whereas on mobile, we get that
information in a different order, which
makes it more digestible. The simplest
way, of course, to get through all of
this is to just offer free shipping, but
obviously it's not possible for every
business. All righty. The next thing we
need to get over is forcing people to
create an account before they can even
check out. Like we said earlier, we want
people to create an account. It's great
if they create an account cuz then
you've got their information. You can
remarket to them. You can send a bandit
cart. All that type of stuff. Happy
days. We love people signing up for
account. But what's not cool is forcing
them to do this before they go to the
checkout. We just hate this for some
reason as human beings. Just like we
hate being burnt. We hate being killed.
We hate being forced to sign up before
we can check out. I'm going to show you
some bad ways of doing this to prove
that nobody gets it 100% right 100% of
the time. We're back to our old friends
boots. Let's say that we've seen these
things. We like our free gifts. We're
going to be just browsing. That turns
into an impulse purchase. Happy days. We
click check out. Then what happens?
Well, the first thing that happens is we
go to this page. I want to check out as
guest. I don't have an account. Well,
the check out as guest thing isn't
massively obvious. The fact that this is
a tab isn't particularly clear. It's not
highlighted. It's not a clear button.
But let's say I go to it anyway. I then
have to click through another message.
They're forcing me to read stuff. I just
want to freaking check out and give you
my money. Please stop getting in my way.
But no, I have to click continue. Then
what happens is totally inexcusable. I'm
then forced to go through a recapture.
Are you freaking kidding me? Okay, fine.
I'm not a robot. Then we have to wait
for all of this to happen. Absolute wash
out. You want people to be able to check
out as quickly as possible. By the way,
if you think that's bad, check this out
on zilly.com.
You can't even see products without
signing up. Am I qualified to sign up
for this? Do I know anything about this
business? Do I know that it sells the
right products for me? Do I know that
they ship to my location? Do I know that
the terms are acceptable to me? Do I
know that they sell at the right price
for me? No. I know nothing. I'm being
forced to sign up before I can even look
at the website. I just hope they're not
running PPC to this or any traffic to
this.
All right, let's look at a good example
to cleanse our souls. This is how Nike
or Nike if you're American encourages
you to become a member. And by the way,
becoming a member is just their
membership club. So they have your
signup details. So the first stage is we
go through the delivery details. We put
in our information about where we're
sending the thing through to. We then
have a choice of deliveries. We can
either pay for delivery or free. We can
become a Nike member. And all we need to
do is fill in our information. Now to
me, this is absolute genius because this
is when membership makes the most sense.
They're not asking me to become a member
earlier than it absolutely makes sense
to for me. I'm essentially being paid £4
pound50 to sign up for membership and
that's what it feels like. So, it's a
great implementation and Nike fair play
for delaying that request. Love you. You
just did it. Okay, let's address the
credibility thing. The thing about
people being afraid to put in their card
details or somehow unsure about the
business. Now, adding credibility
triggers to your checkout pages and your
cart pages is not only a great way to
give your business credibility, but it's
also a great way to answer any last
minute objections people might have
about things like delivery reliability
or the quality of your brand. Now, one
of my favorite spaces for analyzing this
type of thing is the atome orthodontics
solution industry, right? Smile Direct
Club and all of those. Now, this is a
fascinating space. We're going to do
some videos on them. Um, loads of the
businesses in this space just copy each
other. A lot of their websites basically
look exactly the same. Now, the customer
journey, for those who aren't familiar,
you get an impression kit, which you
little trays that you stick in your
mouth. You then send that back and then
they start you on your program of
getting straight teeth. So, this
impression kit is a really important
sale because this is their trip wire.
They're not really generating leads
through an email capture. They just want
you to buy the impression kit. So this
page becomes really important. The first
thing to notice about this page is that
it's both a product page and the
checkout page. They don't have a
separate page. This is obviously easier
for a business that sells one product or
one trip wire. So not everyone can do
this, but we can take these lessons and
apply them to the checkout page as well.
So notice how they've got information
about the product just like we would
expect on any product page. We then go
into the shipping stuff and the payment
stuff. The bit that's really interesting
for me is this credibility that's added
just below the shipping stuff. So, if
you're filling it out, you're like, e,
maybe not sure, maybe let's have a
little look. More than 1 million
satisfied griners and counting is a
great credibility headline. Absolutely
love it. Then we've got people of
different ages, genders, races. You can
see yourself in here. You can see that
this is a universal product. People are
loving it. It's userenerated photos as
well, which gives credibility, which is
fantastic. If we're still not convinced,
underneath that, we have 21,000
five-star reviews on the site. So,
what's the impression that you get from
this? This is pretty safe. This is a
safe bet. That that uncertainty, that
doubt that you might have is washed away
in a tide of testimonials. Love it. Now,
it's not possible for every business to
add credibility stuff like testimonials
and reviews to their cart pages and
their checkout pages. For example, if
you're on Shopify, unless you're on
Plus, you're going to have difficulty
adding testimonials to your checkout
pages, but you can usually add them to
your cart pages with an extension. So,
do what you can here. You're not going
to be able to get it perfect. And of
course, if you're selling loads of
products, you might find it difficult to
have product specific reviews in the
basket. So, just opt for business
reviews instead, reviews of the company
as a whole. The rule here is that the
more you can do is better. You don't
have to wait to get it perfect before
you implement it. The final checkout
abandonment gremlin that we're going to
squish is credit card is declined, not
enough payment options. Credit cards get
declined for all sorts of reasons and
not just because people don't have any
money. As an HSBC business banking
customer, I can tell you HSBC's fraud
team can block a payment that we've made
every week for the last 8 years to
exactly the same vendor for exactly the
same amount. I think it's just their way
of showing that they care. But allowing
your customers to pay with an alternate
payment method, for example, PayPal,
Amazon Pay, if their main credit card
gets blocked is a really good thing to
do. Also worth noting is the rise of
Apple Pay. So if you've ever watched
someone realize that they don't have
their card on them and they have to go
and type the details, they have to get
up and go and find their card and hunt
and peck their credit card into some
nonautofill card form. You will
appreciate the value of having two taps
on the side of your phone to pay for
something. Apple Pay and Google Pay have
changed the game. And with platforms
like Stripe promising merchants up to
2.5x
increase in conversions by using Apple
Pay and Google Pay, it makes it an
absolute no-brainer. One final thing to
touch on here is the rise of the split
payment options. Cler, Clear Pay, Layby,
all these types of things. Really
contentious and huge debt bubble that's
likely to burst all over everyone's
faces at some point. But until that
happens, you can use them to increase
your e-commerce conversion rate. For
example, Cler claims that installment
financing and checkout increases
conversion rate by 30%. And average
order value by 58%. Now, you might
think, well, the products we offer not
really worth splitting payments for.
Well, going back to boohoo.com here, you
can see how I could pay for my £5 dress
in six weekly installments. So
affordability as a relative term and
these services increase conversion rate
because they allow people to split
payments on even minuscule purchases. So
I hope you found this video useful.
We've looked at the top causes of cart
and checkout abandonment and some of the
ways that you can remove or reduce them.
We first looked at how we can motivate
people who are just looking and try and
knock them into those impulse purchases.
We then looked at how we could remove
some of the impact of high shipping
costs by offering memberships or trigger
points where people could increase their
basket value in order to get free
shipping. Then we took an intensely
critical look at the frankly
unacceptable practice of requiring
people to sign up for an account before
they go to checkout and what to do
instead so they still sign up for an
account during checkout. We then looked
at how to boost your credibility through
the use of testimonials and reviews both
through the basket cart page and the
checkout. And finally, we talked about
payment options and how to increase the
number of payment options you offer to
your customers. So, they have many
different ways of giving you money. If
you've enjoyed this video, don't forget
to like, subscribe, give us a comment,
some sort of comment, whatever you want
to say. And don't forget to request your
free marketing review as well. Until
next time, see you soon.